See ya! This is an interview. My name is Isabel
Fernandez, and today's date is the 17th of
November of 1984. I'm going to interview
Francisco Jose Guerrero from El Salvador, son of
Francisco Jose Guerrero, leader of National
Conciliation Party, PCN. Today we're going to
discuss US influence on El Salvador elections of
1984. Now, tell me something about your father.
Well, he, in 1961, when there was military power in
El Salvador, there were a few military people and
conservative people get together and formed the
PCN, which was a rough copy of the PRI. from Mexico.
Then, you know, they had a Congress election, and
PCN took all the seats in the Congress. And my
father got elected president of the Congress.
That was 1962. But the president was, who was it,
Molina? No, it was Rivera, Coronel Rivera. Then in
67, it was General... General
Fidel Sanchez Hernandez got elected president
from the PCN party, and my father was elected
minister of foreign affairs. Oh, okay. In 71, the
military took
the whole control of the PCN party. which, you
know, my father didn't like at all, because, you
know, it was a mix-up between conservative people
and military people. So he resigned. From the PCN.
From the PCN. That was 71. And he got out of the
politics until 80...
It was 80. The PCN party got thrown out of power by
some military... in 1979. It was October 15, 1979.
And they were hassled. They were threatened. They
couldn't have meeting together because the
military junta was to kill that party. They
decided that they didn't want no PCN to exist. Then
my father and some other conservative people
started rebuilding the party for the 82 election.
But there was another party formed from the PCN,
which was ARENA.
In 72, there was Coronel Molina, the president.
And in 77, it was Coronel Romero, the president.
Both of those people that formed the government,
that the PCN took from 72 to 79, those were the
people who formed ARENA.
Which, you know, it was more, they were more
conservative. than the PCN really was. So it was
more right. That's what they call the
ultra-right. And in 81, my father, he decided to
start rebuilding the PCN, as I was saying. And then
in 82, we won 14 congressmen out of 60. The
Democratic Party got 24 and Arena got 19. Okay.
Then my father got elected prime minister for that
because, you know, they divided. It was a Congress
election in 82. So they all got together to form a
coalition government, all the parties. And my
father got elected prime minister. In 81. In 82.
Oh, 82. Then he resigned in 82. In 83... And by the
end of 83, he resigned because he was going to run
for president for the PCN party. In 1984? In 1984.
And today he's... Today, you know, he got elected
president of the Supreme Court, which is an
election. He doesn't form, he doesn't, he's a part
for the Duarte's government. Because he's
elected from the Congress, which Duarte doesn't
have the majority. So, you know, he's like the head
of the opposition in El Salvador. Okay. And you
were helping your father with the campaign of
1980? Yeah, that's why I left from here. Because he
needed help, you know, like, to trust, to have a lot
of trust, and talking to... trying to get, you
know, whatever help we could because, you know,
they didn't think that the PCN could be rebuilt.
Oh, I see. So you were talking to the people? Yeah, I
was talking to the people, trying to get the
T-shirts, cheaper T-shirts. You know, we got
about 200,000 plates, you know, with the PCN
symbol. That's, you know, for the peasants, you
know, some of them. All right. Okay, I'm going to
ask you the first question. What sector of the
population supported your father, Spartan?
Easy. Let me explain this. Okay. Okay, now
Salvador, we got most of the peasants. Of the
peasants? But since, you know, these people,
these people who used to own the big lands... they
formed the other party, which was ARENA. Those
were the rich people, right? Yeah, the rich
people. And they tried to convince the peasants to
vote for ARENA, not for PCN. And it got up to a point,
you know, where we were really close. Arena and
PCN. What about Duarte? Well, he was always, you
know, in the head. Yeah, he was always ahead. So he
was first, and then your father's party and Arena
were second. Yeah, but, you know, we never got
together on the second thing because all they want
is... PCN was always the ultra-right party in El
Salvador. And my father, he worked so hard to make
it look, you know, to make it, to put it, put the
party in the middle and, you know, leave it right
now to the ultra right. All right. So he wanted to be
more center. So, you know, he told all his
followers that, you know, they could vote, you
know, for whoever they want. But there is always,
before, there were always two parties, PCN and
PDC. And, you know, they're, Most of the followers
were going to vote against PDC, which is Duarte's
party. Yes, because they've been voting like that
all their lives. I see. So the population that
supported your father was the peasants, right?
Most of the peasants and a few rich people, very
few. So can it be said that your father's party was
the military's party? No, no way. It was the old
military party. The old ones. Yeah, the old ones.
Like, you know, most of them, you know, are out of
office. You know, they are generals, but, you
know, out of office. So what party did the military
support, like? Oh, you know, they... Maybe. You
know, some of them went for us, some of them went for
ARENA, most of them went for ARENA. Oh, so most of
the military were... Yeah, because in El
Salvador, since there is a war going on, there is a
lot of young military people. And they are more
into bullets than dialogue. I see. And my father
was always for the dialogue. Okay. But, you know,
we got help, Duarte got help from the military too.
Oh, you know, the mayor took part in ghetto. Okay.
Do you see any possibility of the El Salvadorian
army taking over the elections since it happened
in 1972?
I don't know what happened in 72, but I don't think
the army got control of that. That's what Duarte
says. Yeah, that's what Duarte says, that he won
the election. He really won the election, but he
didn't have the majority. It was a mistake. I'm
glad my father was out of PCN by then, because he won
the election for sure, but he didn't have the
majority. So how come he can win the election? No,
because you don't need 50% plus one vote. You need
51%. I see. So that 1% might be 1,000 votes, 10,000
votes, whatever. And then that was, for me, that
was the mistake. They could have at least give
Duarte the benefit of the doubt that he won. And
then, you know, going to Congress, which PCN had
the majority, Coronel Molina was going to be
elected anyway. As president? As president,
because, you know, that's the law in El Salvador.
If you don't get the majority, you have to go to
Congress. Oh, and Congress decides. Decides who
wins. So in this election, the Congress decides
for Molina? Yeah, it was on the military people.
Oh, okay. All right. Did the U.S. aid workers help
your father with the campaign? No. We kind of were
told that we were the favorites for the American
because Duarte went too far to the left and Daweson
went too far to the right. As you know, we got him
talking to Ambassador Pickering a few times. He
said that he'll look at good eyes if my father goes
to the second round. But that's about it. No, they
help us, you know, and getting reporters and
getting, you know, a bunch of reporters and media
to my father's rabbit. Did the U.S. aid workers
help Duarte's campaign? The U.S. government
didn't help Duarte. The AFL-CIO
gave some money to the AFL-CIO corresponding to El
Salvador. And, you know, they are the new
population of El Salvador. It's like the agrarian
reform, people who live in the parts where the
agrarian reform were settled. And, you know,
since most of them are peasants, you know, they go
door by door, door by door trying to convince
people to vote for Duarte because Duarte doesn't
have a peasant support. He didn't? He didn't have
none. I mean, he won only in three departments out
of 14, which were, you know, where the big cities
were. So he won elections in the city? Yeah, he won
the election in the city, but the peasants, you
know, always go against him because, you know. All
right. Okay, it's been said that if the U.S.
retires its help from El Salvador, the
Salvadorian army will collapse. Now, it was clear
that Reagan administration wanted Duarte to win.
I mean, reading the newspaper, I always read that
they wanted Duarte, not your father. Either
Davison didn't want that one at all. So do you feel
that these two facts put a lot of pressure on the
election? People voting for Duarte because maybe
they felt that if Davison won... You know, if you
see the figures, the figures are very close. I
think they were 50% to 48%, something like that.
And you can see that most of the peasants vote
against Duarte. They don't vote for Davison. They
vote against Duarte. Yeah, but your father got
19%. Davison got 30%. 29%. Davison, okay. 29% and
Duarte got like 44%. 43%. 43%, right. So... I mean,
a lot of people support him. He kept that vote. He
kept, you know, the people that vote for him, you
know, they vote again. People from Arena and PCN,
they're more used to, since, you know, we were the
official party for so many years. the peasants
from the PCN were more used to having buses to take
them to the boating places. And this time, since we
were not an official party, neither Arena was, we
couldn't put no buses. Oh, I see. So you see, most of
the people who vote, they just vote. No, but if you
compare the results from the first round and the
second round, you'll see that Duarte kept their
votes. He didn't win, you know, people from the PCN
or people from other parties. But Arena, he won
most of the PCN. But they didn't vote for Dawison
because, you know, it was Dawison. They voted
against Duarte. All right. So you're saying that
the people didn't vote for Duarte? No. Okay, I see.
During the campaign, did you get any threats from
any side? We got threats from all sides. You see,
since, you know, we were the middle, which
Duarte's party used to be the middle party. All
right. But the guerrillas used to be the far left.
But this time, you know, we were in the middle. We
got threatened by... leftists, by guerrillas, by
right. Really? Yeah, we get, you know, there was
once, you know, when I had to tell, you know, I had to
really stand, you know, and tell them, man, if
you're going to use that, if you're going to pull
that gun, you better use it. Because, you know,
there was this major of this city from Arena, that
he just went to the rally. and says, you know, there
is no rally in here. And I was the only one
presenting my father's party in there and a group
that was playing music. Because, you know, we were
the ones that had the always very happy rallies,
you know, music, pupusas, and everything.
Because, you know, we wanted to feel happy. Most of
our buddies are young people. All right. And, you
know, this guy just went, you know, and told us he's
the boss from that town, and I told him. So he didn't
let you speak to the people? We didn't. Oh, okay.
Because we have security, too. All right. In your
opinion, why didn't the guerrillas show up their
ballot to the elections? Because they don't have
the support of the people. If they're They're
burning buses. They're burning things that the
majority of the people use. I got my own car. If they
burn a bus in El Salvador, I'm not using that bus.
The majority of the people are using it. The
bridges, they explode. You see, I can take a plane
and fly over. But the passengers, they cannot
afford it. the majority of the support of the
people they don't like for it. So you think that
it's because they knew that the people wouldn't
vote for them, so they decided not to show up? I see.
Did you feel that the elections were a farce made in
USA so that Reagan could call Congress and keep on
sending military help? No, it wasn't. It wasn't.
You see, he won. He won mainly Because it was about
time. He's been trying for so long to be a
president. He was the president of the Junta,
which is not elected. I'm sure that if all the
parties get together, all the opposition
parties, we can beat Duarte. But we never did that.
That was our promise, to let Duarte go. All right.
Was the people forced to vote by threats from the
different parties? And did they vote just out of
fear? No, not really. You see, the people went to
vote. They wanted to vote? They wanted to vote.
They wanted to elect somebody. So, okay. You know,
there were no force, no matter. Okay, after the
first election, Duarte and his son were tied,
right? And a runoff was necessary. Did your father
get any kind of financial help from CIA so that he
couldn't help Duarte, he would help Duarte? We
couldn't, we didn't, you see, the main problem of
my father's campaign was money-wise. Right.
Because, you know, he... He paid out of his own
package most of the campaign. If we could have at
least $436,000, I think that's what they said,
that my father received, and that campaign, I'm
sure we would end up in second place. No, but I mean
afterwards. Afterwards. So that your father
wouldn't... No. We got together with the arena
party to talk. And they just went, clearly, we got a
cake. Let's divide it. Everyone can do whatever
they want, but let's divide it half and half. And my
father is not like that. See, he's been in the
politics for so long that he told me, I want these
issues. to be corrected from your party, you know,
I'll give you all. Even they wanted to change that
was on for my father. I mean, my father for that was
on. And there was a law given around those days that
my father was going to be able to run for arena. And
he didn't accept. Oh, really? Yeah, he just went
straight and told them, too much talking, and no,
no, we're not doing nothing. I see. But if you
compare figures, most of our people, we have
a neutrality.
But at the same time, we're against Duarte's
party. See, most of our people vote for Arena.
Okay. Davison wanted a military victory over the
guerrillas. So did your father, right? No, my
father was for the dialogue all the time. He was?
Yeah. So that's the reason for which your father
didn't help Davison on the run-up? No, it wasn't
just because of that, because it was going to be
decided between two polarizations. If that was on
one, it was bad for our country. We could win a
prison, but the country wouldn't be getting arms,
bullets, which are needed now. So that's, you
didn't, your father, okay. No, but you know, he
went ahead and told me, you know, I'm neutral, but I
like that we sound better. So if the U.S. had been
kept out of this election, would your father have
joined Aluson? No, I don't think so. Like if the
U.S. didn't have anything to do? You know, there
was one point where, you know, the support from
both parties was almost real. Almost real. But,
you know, there were people in the arena that they
just wanted to have the power to give their farms
back. give their banks back you know there were
things it was like you know going back give their
banks back to rich people so that's what that's
what my father told me my father told me there is no
way this can be done so that's the reason why your
father didn't join the he didn't join it publicly
underground I was offered to go on a commercial
with the arena. But you just, okay, wait a minute,
wait a minute. You just told me that you didn't,
your father didn't join Davison publicly because
you knew that if Davison had won the election, you
wouldn't receive any more help. Issues, also the
issues. Okay, that's the other thing, okay. Like,
you know, like you say, he wanted a military
victory. We wanted dialogue. He was, you know, to,
my father was for, to get the, all the, all the
reformers to make them good. Dawesan wanted to
take them all out. So it sounds to me that your
father was more, ideologically, he was more close
to Duarte than to Dawesan. And the issues. Right,
and the issues. And the issues. But Duarte is not,
you know, what you're hearing here. He's not? He's
not, because, you know, I was with him at, you know,
we met with both parties. But usually with the PDC,
with Duarte's party, we just had an hour or
something like that. But with that we saw, you see,
we always ended up, you know, until next day. Ah, I
see. You know, here I read, like, I thought it was, I
think Newsweek, somewhere like that, said that
your father was helping Duarte. He was getting
together with Duarte. Yeah, he was getting
together with Duarte. Yes, he did. So publicly, he
was helping Duarte? No, publicly, no. You know,
first thing, after the first round, He said,
exactly, I won't go anywhere. Whoever wants me,
you know, go to my house. Duarte, being the first,
the first, the first place, you know, in the first
round, the election was Sunday, and he was in my
house Monday at 8 o'clock in the morning. Yeah,
because your father's party was the decisive
party. Yeah, yeah. It was up to your father who was
going to win. It was up to my father who was going to
win. But it's not true that either. So your father
didn't help any party? Well, he helped on the other
table more than Davison. He helped Davison? But
still Davison lost? But still Davison lost
because he didn't win out publicly.
Oh, all right. Okay, do you think that in case of a
Davison victory, the U.S. will have taken
military action? The military action against
what? Against your country. I mean, taking
like... They haven't done it in Nicaragua. So you
don't think it will happen? Besides, you know,
like Duarte says, now, you know, you can hear
Duarte, you know, he's more, he's thinking more
than talking. He says, you know, Salvadorian
problem belongs to Salvadorian. That's ideally,
actually, but I don't think that's the case.
That's not the case because, you know, we're in a
war. We depend on the states. But, you know, for
like the dialogue that happened about three weeks
ago, they didn't invite no American. So do you
think that Davison didn't win the elections
because you are in a war and you depend on the U.S.?
Most of the people also, you see, Davison wanted a
military victory. That's because, you know, he
lives in the city. Most of the peasants live in
guerrilla-controlled areas where the
government troops always go and bomb. They want
peace. They are tired of military. War and action,
I see. Okay, will the U.S. cut financial aid if
Abuson will have one? That's been told. I'm sure
they could do that. It's up to them. We don't
control the United States. They could have caught
it if Duarte had won, too. Yeah. Well, the U.S., I
mean, the Reagan administration was for Duarte.
That's not true. Do you think not? Well, in the
newspaper, that's what I got. Yeah, but that's
what they said. AFL-CIO is the main base for the
Democratic Party, not the Republican Party. And
the United States helped Duarte Through the
AFL-CIO. That's not Duarte's government. That's
not Reagan's government. But Reagan's the one
that's asking Congress. For help for the country.
Whoever had won it. But still, if that was some...
It would be harder to get. It would be harder to get.
It would have been almost impossible to get money
from Congress. That's something that, you know,
Guatemala doesn't receive nothing from the
states. Who? Guatemala. Oh, Guatemala. And
there, you know, they kill all the guerrillas.
They have more military presence than El
Salvador, and they, you know, they just keep them
going. Okay. What about if Duarte hadn't win the
election? Do you think, okay, it was said that he
had planned a popular insurrection in case of a
Donald Trump victory. It's more like a
psychological war going on, you know. They were
saying, we got together with Duarte. That was
saying that. Because my father knew that he didn't
like to go with Duarte. And Duarte was saying, my
father was going to that with some. It was just a
psychological war. The war was nothing else.
Duarte did it in 72. He got a popular insurrection,
but he didn't work. popular insurrection and
there was only a couple thousand people
insurrected. So even if he had had an insurrection
he wouldn't have done anything. Okay. Do you think
that the problems in your country have to be
settled down by bullets rather than by ballots? It
all depends because you know they the gorillas
depend on Nicaragua and They don't want to go to
election. They want power. They don't want to die
alone. If you see on the dialogue, their main,
their main, uh, military boss, Joaquin
Villalobos, he wasn't in there. Villalobos.
Because, you know, he wanted, uh, uh, uh,
helicopter, a helicopter, you know, flew him from
wherever he was to the La Palma. And even Duarte,
who is the president of El Salvador, he dropped.
Because my father went with him. I see. So you think
that... They don't really, you know, it has to be
settled by ballots because they're going to
understand, the guerrillas will understand that
they don't have the popular support. Okay. Do you
feel that no matter who the president is, the
Salvadorian army is actually in control, and
finally the U.S. is the one deciding for your
country? That's not true either, because what is
happening in El Salvador is that there is a war
going on. have to be controlled by military
people. Duarte is the head commandant of all the
forces in Los Alamos, but he doesn't understand
the war techniques. I see. So the military, they
take care of the war, and Duarte takes care of the
government. Yeah, okay. I read somewhere that the
armed force lives with Duarte as long as he doesn't
attempt to negotiate with the guerrillas or
interfere in any significant way with the army's
conduct on the war. And still, Duarte wants to have
dialogue with the guerrillas. So how can he have
dialogue if the army doesn't want him to do
anything with the guerrillas? That's not true.
You see, the dialogue, that was a few phrases,
pretty nice. They're pals. They're old pals,
Duarte and the guerrillas. It's going to be a
monologue. And that's not true. Duarte and Ungo,
they run for president. Ungo, right. They work
together. He runs for president. But that doesn't
mean they have the same ideology.
But they have one thing in common. They want peace.
But the army doesn't want peace. The army doesn't
want to die alone. The army wants peace. They want
military victory, right? you can say that they
already have the military victory. Because the
guerrillas in Nicaragua, they fought a couple
years, and then Somoza, Somoza government were
thrown out in a couple years. They've been
fighting for five years in my country. They
haven't obtained no military victory. They
control certain parts of the country. But the
peasants from there, they moved to Honduras, they
moved to to places where they keep all these
people, because they don't support the gorillas.
So the army wants a military victory? They want
some, but they already have the military victory.
So how come you have war? Because if Nicaragua is in
between, I saw some prisoners of war that didn't
even talk Spanish. They were Russians? I don't
know. They were black. From where? Nobody knows.
They were just bodies.
So it's more like an exterior support war against
Osagodoro and Corbin. which the military doesn't
like them to intervene. That's why they want a
military victory, not to kill all the
Salvatoreans fighting. They don't want no
Nicaraguan going in there. Duarte wanted to have
land reforms, nationalize the banks and all this.
He already did it. Right. Has the election changed
the situation at all? No, not at all. As a matter of
fact, Arena's phrase for this next campaign They
call it the hundred days of nothing. And that's
true because, you know, there is so many things to
do that it's impossible to start having results so
fast. The land reform, you know, it was given. It
couldn't have taken out. So he didn't offer it. You
know, it was already there. Oh, it was already
there. So but still Duarte cannot do too much
because his hands are tied by the military also. No
because you know as I'm saying the military people
they're more concerned of the war matter and
Duarte is more concerned about laws about you
know. Yeah but if you in a country if you have a war
the most important things, the war, right? The
other things are like, how can you lose if there is a
war? Who's going to respect that? That's what I
mean. How could Duarte? You know, he tries, you
know, and he tries hard. So it doesn't matter if you
have a president. I mean, it doesn't make any
difference. That's what you're saying. Because,
you know, the military, you know, they're there to
preserve the country. All right. And you see, they
are taught that way. They are used to receive
orders, and that's the way it should be. A war is a
war. Okay, so you think you shouldn't have a
president then? Why not? As far as you have a war,
there's no need for a president. Even in Vietnam,
when Johnson was in Vietnam, I'm sure he didn't
have no... No, he had an ideological force sending
people over there. But from over there, the
general commander of the forces, he was in charge.
So since the war is in your country, in your own
country, then the one that's in charge is the army,
right? Yeah, but Duarte, he has a lot of power,
governmental power. Okay. Do you think What do you
think about U.S. intervention on the politics of
your country? Do you think they should be more
involved or less involved? Less. You know,
they're okay. You know, as long as they don't give
you orders to do what you do, it's okay. Because,
like, on the dialogue, Ambassador Picker, he
said, you know, I'm not invited to that. It's hard
to believe that I'm not invited. And Duarte
answered, you know, Salvadorian people had to
resolve their problems. Alright. What about
financial help? We needed it because you know we
were the most progressive country in Latin
America in 77 and 78 in Latin America, Venezuela,
Colombia. Because you know the Salvadorian
people love to work. They are hard working people.
Okay. So you think that the involvement of the U.S.
is all right? It's financial and military
because, you know, we cannot win a war if we have a
machine gun but no bullets. Do you think they
should send more military help to Salvador? Yeah.
Yes? So they should get more involved financially
but not... Financially and military because
we're... But not deciding. Not deciding. Yes, you
know, whatever the government asks them for.
Okay. All right. Okay, tell me, what do you think
that are the causes of the revolution in your
country? Are they social problems or Marxism? You
know, it started as a... Okay, social problems,
right. It started like, you know, they were asking
for social reforms. So social problems. Yeah, but
you see... In El Salvador, there were people with a
lot of lands, a lot of farms. But these people who
had the biggest land, you know, they treated their
peasants in those lands nicer than anybody else.
Like, you know, I know La Carrera, which was the
biggest one. He had TVs, radio. He had, I think in
eight or nine schools, he had a hospital, which,
you know, the one who owns the land, the owner of the
land, he built them for the peasants. So they'll be
happy. Right now, they don't have electricity,
they don't have TVs, they have schools, but, you
know, they don't have no teachers. The hospital
doesn't have any medicines. That's because the
people who get control of that farm after the
agrarian reform They didn't know. They didn't
have any buying power. Which, you know, if one guy
owns this, you know, they have buying power. Okay,
so it started out like social problems. But then,
you know, it got controlled by Marxists. But now
it's controlled by Marxists. So you think that...
Because, you know, the peasants, they noticed
that the leaders of the revolution were pure blah,
blah, blah. I see. You know, they just wanted, you
know, Marxism. Because you can see Ungo, he's
always traveling in first class. Really. Okay.
Ungo Samayo, which was a professor of mine, you
know, he always traveled in first class. When he
came to A&M, you know, I took his tie and said, Peter
Cardan, man, looks nice on you. Because, you know,
if they are Marxists, you know, They should dress
like that. They shouldn't be wearing no... Okay,
who do you think supports the guerrillas?
Nicaragua mainly, Cuba. So you're saying that no
Salvadorian peasants are supporting the
guerrillas? Well, not all of them. But the
majority? The majority is what I'm saying. He
doesn't have not even 40% of the peasants. of the
population of El Salvador, because otherwise,
you know, they could have already won the war. If
the, like Somoza, Somoza, it was anti-Somosist.
You know, everybody got together and threw him
out. But in El Salvador, there is no way, because
they didn't have political support. But also, the
guerrillas haven't won the war because the U.S.
helped. That's not true because, you know, we
receive more help from a bunch of people than from
the States. More help from other countries? Like
Israel helps a lot, a lot more than the United
States. Really? I see. All right. So I think that's
it. Thank you very much.